What is a baby’s world before it is born?
Some might say it is the placenta,
which provides protection and early immunity,
delivers nutrients and oxygen,
and removes carbon dioxide and other waste.
But beyond what the placenta provides,
some other remarkable things are happening
as the baby’s senses develop.
The embryo is touching and feeling
the world around it by 5 ½ weeks,
first as its lips and nose
touch the wall of the uterus
and then extending to the rest of the body.
The sense of taste also develops early.
By 9 weeks, the fetus
can taste some flavors,
and after 13 to 15 weeks,
the taste of amniotic fluid changes
constantly based on what the mother eats.
A developing baby can also hear
most of the sounds are the movement of
its mother’s stomach and intestines,
and blood running through her blood vessels.
But a developing baby can also hear
voices from outside the womb.
By 24 weeks a baby recognizes
and is calmed--by its mother’s voice.
And by 28 weeks, the baby’s sense of smell
takes in odors from things
the mother eats or inhales,
which pass from her blood through the
placenta to the amniotic fluid.
Even the baby’s sense of sight
might be getting stimulation from
some light coming through the womb,
especially when the mother is in bright light.
In addition to hearing, tasting,
smelling, seeing, and touching,
the baby is also practicing
walking in the uterus.
The mother feels these as kicking movements.
And by the third trimester,
a sudden movement by the mother
will cause the baby to fling out its arms
and legs as if losing its balance.